

Cellière2011 - Plasticity of TGF-β Signalling

Transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β) signalling has been implicated as an
important regulator of almost all major cell behaviours, including
proliferation, differentiation, cell death, and motility. It remains unclear
that how the TGF-β signalling pathway accomplishes the flexibility in its
responses. What and how many parameters have to be altered for cells to
respond differently to perform complex tasks? This canonical response has been
explored in this model, by considering the core signalling architecture of
TGF-β pathway.

This model is described in the article:

[Plasticity of TGF-β signaling](http://identifiers.org/pubmed/22051045)

Cellière G, Fengos G, Hervé M, Iber D.

BMC Syst Biol. 2011 Nov 3;5:184.

Abstract:

The family of TGF-β ligands is large and its members are involved in many
different signaling processes. These signaling processes strongly differ in
type with TGF-β ligands eliciting both sustained or transient responses.
Members of the TGF-β family can also act as morphogen and cellular responses
would then be expected to provide a direct read-out of the extracellular
ligand concentration. A number of different models have been proposed to
reconcile these different behaviours. We were interested to define the set of
minimal modifications that are required to change the type of signal
processing in the TGF-β signaling network. RESULTS: To define the key aspects
for signaling plasticity we focused on the core of the TGF-β signaling
network. With the help of a parameter screen we identified ranges of kinetic
parameters and protein concentrations that give rise to transient, sustained,
or oscillatory responses to constant stimuli, as well as those parameter
ranges that enable a proportional response to time-varying ligand
concentrations (as expected in the read-out of morphogens). A combination of a
strong negative feedback and fast shuttling to the nucleus biases signaling to
a transient rather than a sustained response, while oscillations were obtained
if ligand binding to the receptor is weak and the turn-over of the I-Smad is
fast. A proportional read-out required inefficient receptor activation in
addition to a low affinity of receptor-ligand binding. We find that targeted
modification of single parameters suffices to alter the response type. The
intensity of a constant signal (i.e. the ligand concentration), on the other
hand, affected only the strength but not the type of the response.
CONCLUSIONS: The architecture of the TGF-β pathway enables the observed
signaling plasticity. The observed range of signaling outputs to TGF-β ligand
in different cell types and under different conditions can be explained with
differences in cellular protein concentrations and with changes in effective
rate constants due to cross-talk with other signaling pathways. It will be
interesting to uncover the exact cellular differences as well as the details
of the cross-talks in future work.

This model is hosted on [BioModels Database](http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels)
and identified by:
[MODEL1208280000](http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels/MODEL1208280000) .

To cite BioModels Database, please use: BioModels Database: An enhanced,
curated and annotated resource for published quantitative kinetic models.
PMID: [20587024](http://identifiers.org/pubmed/20587024) .

To the extent possible under law, all copyright and related or neighbouring
rights to this encoded model have been dedicated to the public domain
worldwide. Please refer to [CC0 Public Domain
Dedication>http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/] for more
information.

